.. title: PCJ Writeup
.. slug: legal-pcj-writeup
.. date: 2025-02-19
.. tags: 
.. category: 
.. link: 
.. description: Postmaster cases - Perverting the Course of Justice
.. type: text
.. hidetitle: True

.. _top:

The postmasters criminal cases: perverting the course of justice?
=================================================================

by Jeremy Dawson
----------------

| For Nick Wallis's book, The Great Post Office Scandal (GPOS), to which
  I refer, see
  https://bathpublishing.com/products/the-great-post-office-scandal-first.
| It's described - appropriately, in my opinion - as "An extraordinary
  journalistic expos√© of a huge miscarriage of justice"

The Williams enquiry transcripts are available under
https://www.postofficehorizoninquiry.org.uk/hearings. For this piece
I've looked only at 14 to 25 Feb (and not thoroughly).

Paul Marshall, in a speech to the University of Law in London on 3rd
June 2021, "Scandal at the Post Office, the Intersection of Law, Ethics
and Politics", see
https://www.postofficetrial.com/2021/06/marshall-spells-it-out-speech-to.html
says

   ... some Post Office lawyers knew of information that would have
   provided a defence to defendants. Other lawyers knew of information
   that would have enabled convicted defendants to launch appeals to the
   Court of Appeal long, long before March 2021. I hope that some of
   them may end up in prison for perverting the course of justice.

A view I share, for some additional reasons I outline.

Subpostmasters were told that they were the only ones suffering from apparent unreliability of the Horizon system
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In his GPOS book, page 64, Nick Wallis says

   Over the 14-year period the Post Office was prosecuting people,
   dozens of Subpostmasters have reported they were told by Post Office
   contract managers, investigators and helpline operators that they
   were the only ones having problems with Horizon.

I found examples of this, too many (25) to list, mentioned individually
in Nick's book (GPOS) or the transcripts of the two weeks 14 Feb to 25
Feb 2022 of the Williams enquiry.

Furthermore, of a meeting of around 20 to 25 former Subpostmasters
(GPOS, pg 98), one says

   'The main thing I remember was all of us saying how we'd been told
   that we were the only ones having problems with Horizon. The Post
   Office investigators told me I was the only one having problems with
   Horizon, and most of the people in the room at Fenny Compton had been
   told exactly the same thing.'

Sir Wyn Williams, in the first focus group of his Post Office Horizon IT
review, in January 2021, said (see GPOS, pg 454)

   he was 'not very happy' to hear Shann's account of repeatedly being
   told she was the only person having problems with Horizon, adding
   that if it was or had been replicated around the country, 'then it's
   not too strong for me to say that that would be reprehensible.'

Now in these accounts it is generally unclear whether these false
statements were made in the context of pending or possible litigation,
or (for example) simply made by lazy Horizon IT help desk staff. What I
say assumes the former, and also that these false statements were made
knowingly or recklessly.

The decision of the High Court of Australia (Australia's highest court)
in Meissner v The Queen [1995] HCA 41; (1995) 184 CLR 132 at
http://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/1995/41.html
concerned a prosecution for attempting to pervert the course of justice.

In para 21 of the majority judgment it was said

   There appears to be no reported authority in the British Commonwealth
   to the effect that a person who improperly influences an accused to
   plead guilty to an offence is guilty of attempting to pervert the
   course of justice.

If so, this case became the first such authority: the court upheld the
conviction on the charge that he "did attempt to pervert the course of
justice in that he did improperly endeavour to influence ... to enter a
plea of guilty to a charge of ...".

Unfortunately the court's discussion of what constitutes "improper
means" did not deal with giving false information to the defendant.

The Post Office agreed to drop some charges if no issue was made of the reliability of the Horizon system
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the evidence submitted by Ian Henderson to the BIS Select Committee
at https://committees.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/6580/html/, at para
3.3(e) he found in a particular case that "The Prosecution insisted that
as part of the agreement to drop the charge of Theft, that no mention of
alleged problems with the Horizon computer system would be made."

Likewise see Second Sight's Final Report, quoted in GPOS, pg 277, "We
have also been told of agreements whereby no mention was to be made in
court, by the defendant, of any criticism of the Horizon system".

In the appellants' submission in *Hamilton* (GPOS, pg 458)

   plea bargain deals were routine, and that even when theft charges had
   been dropped, a guilty plea to false accounting might only be
   accepted by the Post Office 'if the defendant confirmed in writing
   that "there is no criticism made towards the functioning and
   reliability of the Horizon system." '

Particular cases I noted include Noel Thomas (GPOS, pg 42, and Williams
enquiry transcript 14 Feb, pg 146), and Jo Hamilton (transcript 14 Feb,
pg 105).

Again the Australian case of Meissner (above) is relevant: in para 21 of
the judgment of Dawson J,

   Whatever the means used, any attempt to induce a witness to give
   false evidence on oath or to refrain from speaking the truth must
   amount to an attempt to pervert the course of justice for then the
   end is improper.

The judgement cites English cases, R v Kellett [1976] QB 372, which says

   If he alters his evidence or will not give it 'through affection,
   fear, gain, reward, or the hope or promise thereof' ... the course of
   justice is perverted.

which also says

   A jury should be directed that a threat (or promise) made to a
   witness is ... an attempt to pervert the course of justice, if made
   with the intention of persuading him to alter or withhold his
   evidence

and Regina v Toney [1993] 1 WLR 364 at 370, and the New Zealand case R v
Taffs [1991] 1 NZLR 69, to similar effect.

Incentives to plead guilty although not guilty
----------------------------------------------

There are two categories of this:

-  Lesser sentences following guilty plea ("sentence reduction")
-  Dropping of more serious charges upon a guilty plea to lesser charges
   ("charge reductions")

In an adjournment debate at Westminster Hall in Dec 2014 (see
http://becarefulwhatyouwishfornickwallis.blogspot.com/2014/12/transcript-of-westminster-hall-debate.html)
this is said

   "The more it goes on, the more we will hear of sub-postmasters ending
   up in prison or declaring guilt for something that they have not done
   in order to avoid a custodial sentence. That is not how justice works
   in this country and it is not how justice should be seen to be
   working."

There is a discussion of this by Rebecca Helm, referring primarily to
the postmasters, at
https://evidencebasedjustice.exeter.ac.uk/false-guilty-pleas-and-the-post-office-scandal/

In a journal article the same author discusses these incentives to plead
guilty in detail. See "Constrained Waiver of Trial Rights? Incentives to
Plead Guilty and the Right to a Fair Trial", Journal of Law and Society,
46(3), 423-447. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jols.12169

The "sentence reduction" incentive is according to sentencing
guidelines, see
https://www.sentencingcouncil.org.uk/overarching-guides/crown-court/item/reduction-in-sentence-for-a-guilty-plea-first-hearing-on-or-after-1-june-2017/
though apparently a sentence reduction of up to one-third for pleading
guilty can change a prison term to a fine.

Whether or not this is an excessive incentive, it is under the control
of the courts, and done according to these set guidelines. Except for
the following clue as to what may actually go on.

At
http://becarefulwhatyouwishfornickwallis.blogspot.com/2011/02/whats-up-at-post-office.html
(under (3) Simon in Norfolk)

   She intended to plead not guilty to all charges but the barrister
   told her that the Post Office would look for a custodial sentence if
   she was found guilty

I have understood that after a guilty verdict or plea, the parties
address the court about the appropriate sentence. If this means that the
prosecutor's submissions can vary according to whether the plea was
guilty or not guilty, then this fact could lead to a greater incentive
for pleading guilty than is allowed by the guidelines.

The "charge reduction", on the other hand, is up to the prosecutors, not
the court.

There is a Code for Crown Prosecutors at
https://www.cps.gov.uk/publication/code-crown-prosecutors which says

   6.3. Prosecutors should never proceed with more charges than are
   necessary just to encourage a defendant to plead guilty to a few. In
   the same way, they should never proceed with a more serious charge
   just to encourage a defendant to plead guilty to a less serious one.

It may be that the courts could and should take more interest than they
do in whether prosecutors comply with this. (Of course the Post Office
prosecutions weren't conducted by Crown Prosecutors anyway).

Again, there are numerous cases of this either in the GPOS book or in
the transcripts of the Williams enquiry.

Ian Henderson of Second Sight found

   In some cases, those criminal charges do not seem to have been
   supported by the necessary degree of evidence and have been dropped
   prior to trial, often as part of an agreement to accept a guilty plea
   to a charge of false accounting, so long as the defendant agreed to
   repay all of the missing funds.

(quoted in GPOS, pg 277, see also GPOS, pg 268)

This is also mentioned in 3.3(b) of Ian Henderson's evidence to the BIS
Select Committee (referred to above).

On page 458 of GPOS is quoted a barrister, Tim Moloney, in the Hamilton
appeals, referring to

   an express intention to add charges of theft to an indictment
   alleging false accounting if those charged with false accounting did
   not plead guilty

and quoting a Post Office doccument saying

   If any seeks a trial, then I will add charges of theft

Particularly striking examples include the testimony of Christopher
Trousdale (Williams enquiry, transcript 22 Feb, pg 80), who said

   So they said "If you don't plead guilty, we're going to add the theft
   charge and escalate it to the Crown Court and you can be facing seven
   years in jail".

and John Dickson (Williams enquiry, transcript 21 Feb, pg 9, and GPOS,
pp 167-8) where apparently his wife was charged, with the Post Office
agreeing to drop charges against her so long as he would plead guilty.

In one case, Scott Darlington (Williams enquiry, transcript 17 Feb, pg
123) it appears that the Post Office disclosed, by mistake, advice that
they did not have sufficient evidence for the theft charge which they
had laid.

In para 22 of the majority judgment in Meissner v The Queen (above) it
is said

   If a plea of guilty ... is in fact procured by pressure and threats,
   there is a miscarriage of justice. In such a case, the court is
   falsely led to dispense with a trial on the faith of a defective
   plea. The course of justice is thus perverted.

Other prosecutor misconduct
---------------------------

I noticed some other (hopefully) less common examples of misconduct by
prosecutors in GPOS and the Williams enquiry transcripts.

Suzanne Palmer (Williams enquiry, transcript 23 Feb, pg 56) said "they
[the Post Office legal team] said if she gives evidence on my behalf
they will prosecute her as well". The cases of Kellett and Meissner
mentioned above show how this is clearly an attempt to pervert the
course of justice.

I noted two cases recorded where the Post Office told potential witness
that they could not speak to the defendant. These were Nicki Arch (GPOS,
pg 358) and Lisa Brennan (Williams enquiry, transcript 15 Feb, pg 51).
The lawyers' expression here is "property in witnesses": there is none.
That is, neither side can "own" potential witnesses, or can be entitled
to exclusive access to them. In the case Connolly v Dale, see
https://swarb.co.uk/connolly-v-dale-qbd-11-jul-1995/ it was said

   Interference with witnesses or potential witnesses by threat, promise
   or subsequent punishment is a contempt: R v Kellett, Attorney General
   v Butterworth. In our judgment, the concept of interference with
   witnesses extends to interference with proper and reasonable attempts
   by a party's legal advisers to identify and thereafter interview
   potential witnesses.

See also Versloot Dredging BV v HDI Gerling
https://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWHC/Comm/2013/581.html

UPDATE: An enquiry report
`ACT-Board-of-Inquiry-Criminal-Justice-System-Final-Report-31-July-2023.pdf <https://www.justice.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/2263980/ACT-Board-of-Inquiry-Criminal-Justice-System-Final-Report-31-July-2023.pdf>`__,
which was so critical of the ACT Director of Public Prosecutions that it
led to his resignation, says (at para 544, and see para 545)

   Any direction to sequester a police witness from the defence would
   have been improper because it is a fundamental principle that no
   party can claim property in a witness. The principle is so critical
   that it is embodied in the rules governing the ethical practice of a
   barrister.

Postscript: Fujitsu
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following post has just appeared
https://www.postofficescandal.uk/post/treasury-announces-compensation-for-555-civil-litigants.

Briefly, the Government intends to go after Fujitsu to "tackle
compensation". Just to make it clear, *none* of the misconduct recounted
above, or its consequences, can be blamed on Fujitsu. Nor can the fact
that the Post Office continued to pursue subpostmasters when it was
clear something was wrong, as when

-  multiple subpostmasters reported the same problem
-  when its own trainers or managers reported problems they couldn't
   understand
-  discrepancies doubling when subpostmasters followed helpline
   instructions

`[Goto Top] <#top>`_
